docs(issue-platform): Add docs for writing a detector (#964)
getsentry/develop: src/docs/issue-platform-detectors.mdx

    - Parameterized source span description: Including parameterized descriptions of the source span in the fingerprint.
    - Parameterized parent span description + parent operation: Incorporating parameterized descriptions of the parent span, along with the parent operation, in the fingerprint.

By utilizing this fingerprinting approach, we can effectively identify and classify N+1 database queries based on their unique characteristics and contextual information, ensuring effective grouping.

# Actionability/Usefulness

Once you have figured out the fingerprinting process and know how to group instances of the same problem with the same fix, the next step is to provide users with all the necessary information to fix the issue. The quality of an issue lies not only in its accurate detection but also in its actionability.

N+1 DB Query detection relies heavily on span analysis to identify problematic spans and guide users toward a potential fix.

Reporting circumstantial data is not useful! This is a crucial distinction between issues and alerts. Issues should pinpoint root problems and help resolve them.

> ![Untitled](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting01.jpg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Span tree screenshot](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting01.png)
```

# Signal vs. Noise

With every new issue type, we could be adding more and more noise to the Issues product. New issues fatigue is real for our customers. This is why it’s important to understand how a new detector you want to ship affects the overall noise of the Issue Stream.

> Accurate detection of truly valuable problems and correct grouping can transform "noise" into "signal." Every detector should be evaluated against this standard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accurate detection of truly valuable problems and correct grouping can transform "noise" into "signal." Every detector should be evaluated against this standard. There is an option to [define a custom noise config](https://develop.sentry.dev/issue-platform/#register-an-issue-type) when creating a new detector.
```

- **Email notifications**. Does the UI match the issue details page for your new detector’s issues?
- **Slack notifications**. Do the notifications for your issue make sense?
- **Integrations**. Does converting your issue to a Jira/Linear/GitLab task work nicely?
- **Searching**. Is is possible to search for your issue by type in the issue stream?
- **Alpha and Beta badges**.  Did you add Alpha or Beta badges to the issue details page as appropriate?
- **Public documentation**. Does your detector have a corresponding page on [docs.sentry.io](https://docs.sentry.io)?

# Testing

Whenever possible, conduct tests using real data. It's advised to use actual transaction event JSON files to perform unit testing for Performance Detectors.

Another tool that we used for validating and testing detector changes is a CLI script: https://github.com/getsentry/sentry/pull/39727

# Deployment

A safe rollout strategy will depend on your team's implementation of detection and issue creation. However, there are general considerations to keep in mind:

- Dry run detectors
    - Validate detection accuracy on real data

>     - Check detection in the production environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Check detection in the production environment. An example of how to conduct an audit is [here](https://www.notion.so/How-To-Audit-Performance-Detector-Dry-Runs-5d2c056b55f44e9d8eac1fd1834a4a20).
```

- Decouple detection and issue creation
    - Roll out detection and issue creation separately
- Options for rates, thresholds
    There are two kinds of options we use at Sentry, options usually refers to “system-wide” `options`, and `projectoptions` refers to options set for specific projects. We are using a combination of these to allow us to opt in the following:

    - Detection rates
        - We have implemented separate detection rates, allowing us to add new detectors or adjust thresholds on existing detectors. This enables us to track and report these changes through metrics
    - Thresholds
        - This capability allows us to fine-tune our detectors and observe their effects in real-time within the production environment. By adjusting the detection parameters and thresholds, we can monitor how these changes impact the detection accuracy and the number of detected issues

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

    ```python
    # projectoptions/defaults.py
    key="sentry:performance_issue_creation_rate", default=1.0

    key="sentry:performance_issue_settings",
    default={
    "n_plus_one_db_count": 5,
    "n_plus_one_db_duration_threshold": 500,
    }
    ```

>     ![Untitled](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting02.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![Project options settings screenshot](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting02.png)
```

- Per-project detection settings

    [Project settings:](https://sentry.io/settings/sentry/projects/sentry/performance/)

>     ![Untitled](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting03.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![Project settings screenshot](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting03.png)
```

# Bits’n’Bobs

Performance issues affect many parts of the system, and it’s easy to overlook something. Here are a few places to look to make sure your issues are working well:

- **UI edges**. Do your issues look correct in the issue stream? Check the severity level, title, description, and hover card content.
- **Email notifications**. Does the UI match the issue details page for your new detector’s issues?
- **Slack notifications**. Do the notifications for your issue make sense?
- **Integrations**. Does converting your issue to a Jira/Linear/GitLab task work nicely?
- **Searching**. Is is possible to search for your issue by type in the issue stream?
- **Alpha and Beta badges**.  Did you add Alpha or Beta badges to the issue details page as appropriate?
- **Public documentation**. Does your detector have a corresponding page on [docs.sentry.io](https://docs.sentry.io)?

# Testing

Whenever possible, conduct tests using real data. It's advised to use actual transaction event JSON files to perform unit testing for Performance Detectors.

> Another tool that we used for validating and testing detector changes is a CLI script: https://github.com/getsentry/sentry/pull/39727

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another tool that we used for validating and testing detector changes is a CLI script:
    ```text
    # https://github.com/getsentry/sentry/pull/39727
    sentry performance detect /path/to/event.json
    ```
```

---
title: "Issue Platform - Writing Detectors"
---

> 

Reviewer 2: Since this page is in the sidebar, readers might get here without having read the Issue Platform page first. A very brief opening paragraph that says what a detector is and links back to the main Issue Platform page might help just in case? e.g.

```suggestion

Issue detectors identify application issues by examining one or more datasets collected by Sentry, and report detected issue occurances via the <Link to="/issue-platform/">Issue Platform</Link>. Detectors must fingerprint issues accurately and provide actionable information to developers.
```

By utilizing this fingerprinting approach, we can effectively identify and classify N+1 database queries based on their unique characteristics and contextual information, ensuring effective grouping.

# Actionability/Usefulness

Once you have figured out the fingerprinting process and know how to group instances of the same problem with the same fix, the next step is to provide users with all the necessary information to fix the issue. The quality of an issue lies not only in its accurate detection but also in its actionability.

 N+1 Database queries heavily rely on span analysis to identify problematic spans and guide users toward a potential fix.

Reporting circumstantial data is not useful! This is a crucial distinction between issues and alerts. Issues should pinpoint root problems and help resolve them.
![Untitled](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting01.jpg)

# Signal vs. Noise

With every new issue type, we could be adding more and more noise to the Issues product. New issues fatigue is real for our customers. This is why it’s important to understand how a new detector you want to ship affects the overall noise of the Issue Stream.

> Accurate detection of truly valuable problems and correct grouping can transform "noise" into "signal." Every detector should be evaluated against this standard.

Reviewer 3: Should talk about # occurrences for the noise gate since it'll help people if they don't know you can reduce the noise that way.

Reviewer: nice totally. it's already mentioned [here](https://develop.sentry.dev/issue-platform/#register-an-issue-type) but connecting them together would be good

# Bits’n’Bobs

Performance issues affect many parts of the system, and it’s easy to overlook something. Here are a few places to look to make sure your issues are working well:

- UI edges. Do your issues look correct in the issue stream? Check the severity level, title, description, and hover card content.
- Email notifications. Does the UI match the issue details page for your new detector’s issues?
- Slack notifications. Do the notifications for your issue make sense?
- Integrations. Does converting your issue to a Jira/Linear/GitLab task work nicely?
- Searching. Is is possible to search for your issue by type in the issue stream?
- Alpha and Beta badges.  Did you add Alpha or Beta badges to the issue details page as appropriate?
- Public documentation. Does your detector have a corresponding page on [docs.sentry.io](https://docs.sentry.io)?

> # Testing

Reviewer 3: I'd put `Testing / Deployment` maybe under 'Development' or a similar heading. `Fingerprinting` etc. under `Considerations`. 

I think for `Development` I also want all the recommendations (or examples) for setting up a new detector in terms of everything you have to add. `GroupType`, which `ProjectOptions` (and adding a threshold when @Abdkhan14 is done), `Options` for dry run, how the rollout options work etc.

Reviewer: there's more on adding a group type here https://develop.sentry.dev/issue-platform/#writing-a-detector

Whenever possible, conduct tests using real data. It's advised to use actual transaction event JSON files to perform unit testing for Performance Detectors.

> Another tool that we used for validating and testing detector changes is a CLI script: https://github.com/getsentry/sentry/pull/39727

Reviewer 2: I don't know how to put a code block inside a suggestion, but maybe a usage example would be helpful? e.g.

```sh
sentry performance detect /path/to/event.json
```

> Another tool that we used for validating and testing detector changes is a CLI script: https://github.com/getsentry/sentry/pull/39727

Reviewer 3: I'd probably include the actual syntax / output here.

# Deployment

A safe rollout strategy will depend on your team's implementation of detection and issue creation. However, there are general considerations to keep in mind:

- Dry run detectors
    - Validate detection accuracy on real data

>     - Check detection in the production environment

Reviewer 2: I know it's an internal doc, but [the audit process Notion doc](https://www.notion.so/sentry/How-To-Audit-Performance-Detector-Dry-Runs-5d2c056b55f44e9d8eac1fd1834a4a20) is a good resource for internal developers if we're okay linking to it.

- Decouple detection and issue creation

>     - Roll out detection and issue creation separately

Reviewer 3: eg. of options for dry-run since it's confusing? or are we trying to make this generic? We can use an example for how performance issues do it here but just state it's an example and people can dry-run however they want (or don't).

    - Detection rates
        - We have implemented separate detection rates, allowing us to add new detectors or adjust thresholds on existing detectors. This enables us to track and report these changes through metrics
    - Thresholds
        - This capability allows us to fine-tune our detectors and observe their effects in real-time within the production environment. By adjusting the detection parameters and thresholds, we can monitor how these changes impact the detection accuracy and the number of detected issues

    ```python
    # projectoptions/defaults.py
    key="sentry:performance_issue_creation_rate", default=1.0

    key="sentry:performance_issue_settings",
    default={
    "n_plus_one_db_count": 5,
    "n_plus_one_db_duration_threshold": 500,
    }
    ```
    ![Untitled](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting02.png)

- Per-project detection settings

    [Project settings:](https://sentry.io/settings/sentry/projects/sentry/performance/)

>     ![Untitled](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting03.png)

Reviewer 3: complete nit: Alt titles make it easier when editing w/o looking at the rendered

---
title: "Issue Platform - Writing Detectors"
---

> Issue detectors identify application issues by examining one or more datasets collected by Sentry, and report detected issue occurances via the <Link to="/issue-platform/">Issue Platform</Link>. Detectors must fingerprint issues accurately and provide actionable information to developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Issue detectors identify application issues by examining one or more datasets collected by Sentry, and report detected issue occurrences via the <Link to="/issue-platform/">Issue Platform</Link>. Detectors must fingerprint issues accurately and provide actionable information to developers.
```

# Bits’n’Bobs

Performance issues affect many parts of the system, and it’s easy to overlook something. Here are a few places to look to make sure your issues are working well:

- **UI edges**. Do your issues look correct in the issue stream? Check the severity level, title, description, and hover card content.
- **Email notifications**. Does the UI match the issue details page for your new detector’s issues?
- **Slack notifications**. Do the notifications for your issue make sense?
- **Integrations**. Does converting your issue to a Jira/Linear/GitLab task work nicely?
- **Searching**. Is is possible to search for your issue by type in the issue stream?
- **Alpha and Beta badges**.  Did you add Alpha or Beta badges to the issue details page as appropriate?
- **Public documentation**. Does your detector have a corresponding page on [docs.sentry.io](https://docs.sentry.io)?

# Testing

Whenever possible, conduct tests using real data. It's advised to use actual transaction event JSON files to perform unit testing for Performance Detectors.

> Another tool that we used for validating and testing detector changes is a CLI script:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another tool that we used for validating and testing detector changes is a [CLI script](https://github.com/getsentry/sentry/pull/39727):
```

    - Detection rates
        - We have implemented separate detection rates, allowing us to add new detectors or adjust thresholds on existing detectors. This enables us to track and report these changes through metrics
    - Thresholds
        - This capability allows us to fine-tune our detectors and observe their effects in real-time within the production environment. By adjusting the detection parameters and thresholds, we can monitor how these changes impact the detection accuracy and the number of detected issues

    ```python
    # projectoptions/defaults.py
    key="sentry:performance_issue_creation_rate", default=1.0

    key="sentry:performance_issue_settings",
    default={
    "n_plus_one_db_count": 5,
    "n_plus_one_db_duration_threshold": 500,
    }
    ```
    ![Untitled](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting02.png)

- Per-project detection settings

    [Project settings:](https://sentry.io/settings/sentry/projects/sentry/performance/)

    ![Untitled](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting03.png)

> - Metrics metrics metrics
> [DD Dashboard:](https://app.datadoghq.com/dashboard/dfv-k8u-cxm/performance-issues?from_ts=1670859678260&to_ts=1670860578260&live=true)
> 
> ![Untitled](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting04.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
title: "Issue Platform - Writing Detectors"
---

# Fingerprinting

Error events are grouped based on a set of strategies like stack traces, etc. These strategies can be customized by users. Error fingerprinting is a complex ever-evolving mechanism that has been around for many years.

> 

Reviewer: I feel like maybe this isn't needed here. I added it to the doc to contrast error fingerprinting to performance issue fingerprinting but it doesn't seem necessary here

> Error events are grouped based on a set of strategies like stack traces, etc. These strategies can be customized by users. Error fingerprinting is a complex ever-evolving mechanism that has been around for many years.
> 
> For new kinds of issues, starting with a simpler one-level grouping strategy is advised. Fingerprinting strategies can and should evolve, so an incremental approach here works the best. It’s hard to anticipate all edge cases until you can start fingerprinting real data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Error events are categorized using various strategies such as stack traces. Users have the flexibility to customize these strategies. Error fingerprinting is a complex and continuously evolving mechanism that has been in existence for many years.

For new types of issues, it is recommended to start with a simpler one-level grouping strategy. Fingerprinting strategies should be allowed to evolve gradually, as an incremental approach works best. It is difficult to anticipate all edge cases until actual data can be fingerprinted.
```

<aside>

>     📌 **A fingerprint represents a unique problem and its each occurrence has the same root cause and the same fix.** For N+1 Db Query Issues, a fingerprint is a hash of parameterized repeated db span description, source span description, parent span description and a problem class (N+1 db query). <Link to="https://github.com/getsentry/sentry/blob/master/src/sentry/utils/performance_issues/performance_detection.py#L1280">Code</Link>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A fingerprint represents a unique problem and its each occurrence has the same root cause and the same fix. For N+1 Db Query Issues, a fingerprint is a hash of parameterized repeated db span description, source span description, parent span description and a problem class (N+1 db query). <Link to="https://github.com/getsentry/sentry/blob/master/src/sentry/utils/performance_issues/performance_detection.py#L1280">Code</Link>.
```

Reviewer: removing some markdown carried over from notion

Reviewer: also updated the link to reference the correct file

</aside>

If an Issue has 3 events that means that this particular problem has 3 instances and the same cause. Fixing this one issue should ensure that all of those 3 instances won’t occur again.

## Risk: Loose grouping strategy

> Let’s say we group all N+1 db query problems so that a fingerprint would be solely based on a problem class. This violates same problem = same fix principle. N+1 db queries for different queries would have different fixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose we group all N+1 db query problems based solely on the problem class. This violates the principle of "same problem, same fix." Different N+1 db queries would require different fixes.
```

## Risk: Strict grouping strategy

> Let’s say we group all N+1 db queries that have exactly the same span db description (we won’t parameterize them either). That way if a query contains any dynamic fields like dates, then too many issues will be created. Although those issues have the same fix, they won’t be grouped together. This also violates the fingerprinting principles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose we group all N+1 db queries that have exactly the same span DB description (without parameterization). In this case, if a query contains dynamic fields like dates, it would result in too many separate issues. Although these issues have the same fix, they would not be grouped together. This also goes against the principles of fingerprinting.
```

## Risk: Fingerprinting on real users’ events

> Make sure a fingerprinting strategy stands the test of real data. Test fingerprinting not only on Sentry’s data but also on data of other orgs!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure that the fingerprinting strategy is tested with real data, not only from Sentry but also from other organizations!
```

> ## Example: N+1 query fingerprinting brainstorm

Reviewer: hm the formatting here is confusing. I'll rewrite it

- What problem am I detecting?
   - N+1 database query

- What contextual information do I have?
    - Problem Class
    - Repeated span operation, description
    - A span that started repeated spans (preceding span)
    - A parent span of repeated and preceding spans
    - Transaction name
    - Tags
    - SDKs

> - Out of that information, what is unique to the problem?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- From that information, what is unique to the problem?
```

    - Problem Class
    - Repeated span operation, description
    - A span that started repeated spans (preceding span)
    - A parent span of repeated and preceding spans
    - ~~Transaction name~~ different transactions can have the same N+1 problem
    - ~~Tags~~

- Any dynamic fields
    - Parameterized db queries

- Resulting fingerprint
    - Problem Class
    - Parameterized repeated span description
    - Parameterized source span description
    - Parameterized parent span description + parent op

# Actionability/Usefulness

> Let’s say you figured out fingerprinting - you know how to group instances of the same problem that have the same fix. Great! Next step is to equip users with all the necessary information for them to fix the issue. The quality of an issue is not only in the accuracy of detection but also in its actionability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have figured out the fingerprinting process and know how to group instances of the same problem with the same fix, the next step is to provide users with all the necessary information to fix the issue. The quality of an issue lies not only in its accurate detection but also in its actionability.
```

> <aside>
> 📌 N+1 Database queries rely heavily on span analysis to point at problematic spans and guide users to a potential fix.
> 
> </aside>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 N+1 Database queries heavily rely on span analysis to identify problematic spans and guide users toward a potential fix.
```

Reviewer: `<aside>` elements don't get styled so might as well omit them

> Reporting circumstantial data isn’t useful! This is a key differentiator of issues compared to alerts. Issues should point at root problems and help fix them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reporting circumstantial data is not useful! This is a crucial distinction between issues and alerts. Issues should pinpoint root problems and help resolve them.
```

![Untitled](img/issuePlatformFingerprinting01.jpg)

# Signal v. Noise

> With every new issue type, we could be adding more and more noise to the Issues product. New issues fatigue is real for our customers. This is why it’s important to understand how a new detector you want to ship affects the overall noise of the Issue Stream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With every new issue type, we could be adding more and more noise to the Issues product. New issues fatigue is real for our customers. This is why it’s important to understand how a new detector you want to ship affects the overall noise of the Issue Stream.
```

> <aside>
> 📌 Accurate detection of truly valuable problems and correct grouping help turn the “noise” into “signal”. Every detector should be measured against that standard.
> 
> </aside>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accurate detection of truly valuable problems and correct grouping can transform "noise" into "signal." Every detector should be evaluated against this standard.
```

# Bits’n’Bobs

Performance issues affect many parts of the system, and it’s easy to overlook something. Here are a few places to look to make sure your issues are working well:

> - UI edges. Do your issues look correct in the issue stream? Check the severity level, title, description, and hover card content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- UI edges. Do your issues look correct in the issue stream? Check the severity level, title, description, and hover card content.
```

- Email notifications. Does the UI match the issue details page for your new detector’s issues?
- Slack notifications. Do the notifications for your issue make sense?
- Integrations. Does converting your issue to a Jira/Linear/GitLab task work nicely?
- Searching. Is is possible to search for your issue by type in the issue stream?
- Alpha and Beta badges.  Did you add Alpha or Beta badges to the issue details page as appropriate?
- Public documentation. Does your detector have a corresponding page on [docs.sentry.io](https://docs.sentry.io)?

# Testing

> Test with real data as much as possible. We’ve used real transaction JSON files to unit test Performance Detectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever possible, conduct tests using real data. It's advised to use actual transaction event JSON files to perform unit testing for Performance Detectors.
```

Another tool that we used for validating and testing detector changes is a CLI script: https://github.com/getsentry/sentry/pull/39727

# Deployment

A safe rollout strategy will depend on your team’s implementation of detection and issue creation but here are general things that you should consider:

- Dry run detectors
    - Validate detection accuracy on real data

>     - Check detection in prod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Check detection in the production environment
```

- Decouple detection and issue creation
    - Roll out detection and issue creation separately
- Options for rates, thresholds
    There are two kinds of options we use at Sentry, options usually refers to “system-wide” `options`, and `projectoptions` refers to options set for specific projects. We are using a combination of these to allow us to opt in the following:

    - Detection rates

>         - We have separate detection rates so we can add new detectors or modify thresholds on detectors and report it via metrics (datadog or our own transactions)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - We have implemented separate detection rates, allowing us to add new detectors or adjust thresholds on existing detectors. This enables us to track and report these changes through metrics.
```

    - Thresholds

>         - This lets us tune detectors and observe effects live in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - This capability allows us to fine-tune our detectors and observe their effects in real-time within the production environment. By adjusting the detection parameters and thresholds, we can monitor how these changes impact the detection accuracy and the number of detected issues.
```
